Add read pool RFC (#10)
tikv/rfcs: text/2017-12-22-read-pool.md

# Summary

> This RFC proposes a new thread pool that support async operations, which is called `ReadPool`. It is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes a new thread pool that supports async operations, which is called `ReadPool`. It is
```

designed to be specifically used for all sorts of read operations like Kv Get, Kv Scan and
Coprocessor Read to improve performance.

# Motivation

> Currently for all KV operations stay inside `Storage` they are executed on the same thread pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, for all KV operations that stay inside `Storage`, they are executed on the same thread pool.
```

> This lead to bad operation isolation, i.e. heavy writes will cause slow reads. In fact these read

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leads to bad operation isolation, i.e. heavy writes will cause slow reads. In fact, these read
```

operations can be executed on other threads to be not blocked. For Coprocessor operations, we have
an end-point worker thread to handle async snapshots. This is a bottleneck when there are heavy
coprocessor requests.

> By introducing a standalone thread pool that support async operations (which is called ReadPool) in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By introducing a standalone thread pool that supports async operations (which is called ReadPool) in
```

this RFC, we can fix both problems. For KV operations, read and write operations will be executed
on different thread pools, so that they won't affect each other. For Coprocessor operations, since
ReadPool supports async operations, the end-point worker is not necessary anymore and the bottleneck

> no longer exists

Reviewer 2: A period is missing.

> no longer exists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no longer exists.
```

In this RFC, there will be a ReadPool for KV operations and another ReadPool for Coprocessor

> operations, so that they won't block each other. In future there can be possibilities to merge

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure, Is there a plurality for "possibility"?

> operations, so that they won't block each other. In future there can be possibilities to merge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operations, so that they won't block each other. In the future, it may be possible to merge
```

them together.

# Detailed design

The ReadPool provides these features:

1. Support different priorities (high, normal and low).

2. Support contexts and periodical ticking so that we can use local metrics.

3. Support max task threshold as a load control mechanism.

The ReadPool can be implemented via 2 levels. The lower level is a new facility called
`util::FuturePool`, which is a simple encapsulation over [CpuPool](https://docs.rs/futures-cpupool/)
that supports feature 2. The higher level is `server::ReadPool`, which assembles multiple

> `FuturePool`s and supports feature 1 and 3. In this way, `FuturePool` becomes a common facility that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`FuturePool`s and supports features 1 and 3. In this way, `FuturePool` becomes a common facility that
```

> can be reused in future to run other kind of async operations that needs contexts, not just limited

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be reused in the future to run other kinds of async operations that need contexts, not just limited
```

to the scenario listed in this RFC.

## FuturePool

To support periodical ticking, this RFC defines:

```rust
pub trait Context: fmt::Debug + Send {
    fn on_tick(&mut self) {}
}
```

The `FuturePool` user can provide customized `impl Context` so that some code can be executed

> periodically within the context of the thread pool thread.

Reviewer: "the thread pool thread"?

> periodically within the context of the thread pool thread.

Author: ```suggestion
periodically within the context of the thread pool's thread.
```

The `FuturePool` is defined as follows:

```rust
pub struct FuturePool<T: Context + 'static> {
    pool: CpuPool,
    context: Arc<HashMap<thread::ThreadId, T>>
    running_task_count: Arc<AtomicUsize>,
    ……
}
```

> The logic of whether or not calling `on_tick` is, when each task finished running, we check how long

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The logic of whether to call `on_tick` is, when each task finishes running, we check how much
```

> time has elapsed. If the elapsed time since last tick is larger than our tick interval, we call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time has elapsed. If the elapsed time since the last tick is longer than our tick interval, we call
```

`on_tick`. In order to do so in a clean way, we can wrap this logic into a `ContextDelegator`:

```rust
struct ContextDelegator<T: Context> {
    tick_interval: Duration,
    inner: RefCell<T>,
    last_tick: Cell<Option<Instant>>,
}

impl<T: Context> ContextDelegator<T> {
    fn new(context: T, tick_interval: Duration) -> ContextDelegator<T> {
        // ...
    }

    fn on_task_finish(&self) {
        // check and optionally call `self.inner.borrow_mut().on_tick()`
    }
}
```

`FuturePool` users should pass a `Future` to the `FuturePool` to execute, just like `CpuPool`.
However, to obtain access to the `Context` inside `Future`, the provided `Future` should be wrapped

> in a closure which provides access to the `Context` via parameter. Further, the parameter may live

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a closure which provides access to the `Context` via the parameter. In the further, the parameter may live
```

> multiple `Future`s, which maybe running on different threads and different `Context`s. Thus, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple `Future`s, which may run on different threads and different `Context`s. Thus, the
```

parameter is a `Context` accessor instead of a specific `Context`.

> As a result, this RFC further introduces the following struct, which provides access to the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, this RFC further introduces the following struct, which provides an access to the current
```

`Context` based on running thread:

```rust
pub struct ContextDelegators<T: Context> {
    ...
}

impl<T: Context> ContextDelegators<T> {
    pub fn current_thread_context_mut(&self) -> RefMut<T> {
        ……
    }
}
```

The `FuturePool` provides `spawn` interface to execute a `Future` while providing
`ContextDelegators`:

```rust
impl<T: Context + 'static> FuturePool<T> {
    pub fn spawn<F, R>(&self, future_factory: R) -> CpuFuture<F::Item, F::Error>
    where
        R: FnOnce(ContextDelegators<T>) -> F + Send + 'static,
        F: Future + Send + 'static,
        F::Item: Send + 'static,
        F::Error: Send + 'static,
    {
        ……
    }
}
```

## ReadPool

`ReadPool` is implemented over `FuturePool` as follows:

```rust
pub struct ReadPool<T: Context + 'static> {
    pool_high: FuturePool<T>,
    pool_normal: FuturePool<T>,
    pool_low: FuturePool<T>,
    max_tasks_high: usize,
    max_tasks_normal: usize,
    max_tasks_low: usize,
}
```

It also provides an interface similar to `FuturePool::spawn`, which specifies the priority and

> returns error when future pool is full:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
returns an error when `futurepool` is full:
```

> returns error when future pool is full:

Author: ```suggestion
returns an error when `FuturePool` is full:
```

```rust
pub enum Priority {
    Normal,
    Low,
    High,
}

impl<T: futurepool::Context + 'static> ReadPool<T> {
    pub fn future_execute<F, R>(
        &self,
        priority: Priority,
        future_factory: R,
    ) -> Result<CpuFuture<F::Item, F::Error>, Full>
    where
        R: FnOnce(ContextDelegators<T>) -> F + Send + 'static,
        F: Future + Send + 'static,
        F::Item: Send + 'static,
        F::Error: Send + 'static,
    {
        let pool = self.get_pool_by_priority(priority);
        let max_tasks = self.get_max_tasks_by_priority(priority);
        let current_tasks = pool.get_running_task_count();
        if current_tasks >= max_tasks {
            Err(Full {
                current_tasks,
                max_tasks,
            })
        } else {
            Ok(pool.spawn(future_factory))
        }
    }
}
```

# Drawbacks

The `on_tick` implementation in `FuturePool` is not perfect. It is driven by task completion, which
means it will not be executed when there is no task. This is acceptable since we are going to use
`on_tick` to report metrics.

# Alternatives

> We can implement our own future pool, not utilizing `CpuPool`. In this way we can have a true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can implement our own future pool instead of utilizing `CpuPool`. In this way, we can have a true
```

> `on_tick`. However this is complex and is not a necessary feature we need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`on_tick`. However, this is complex and is not a necessary feature we need.
```

> We can implement our own async model, not utilizing `Future`. However there is no benefits compared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can implement our own async model instead of utilizing `Future`. However, there is no benefits compared
```

> to current solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the current solution.
```
